# Abstract {-}

**Background.** The application of accelerometers in sport and physical activity is widely reported and continues to grow rapidly. These devices are appealing for field use as they are small, lightweight, unobtrusive, provide a direct measure of accelerations in up to three directions, and can log data at high speed and store data over long periods of time. Accelerometers are often used in sports as an indirect measure of force during high intensity impact movements, usually occurring over a short period of time. Despite their pervasiveness in applied sports science and sports research, little is known about the validity of accelerometers in these settings. The current literature addressing accelerometer accuracy for quantifying team sport-related movements is scarce, and is not externally valid to the application of such technology in team sport contexts. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to address the following question: “In the context of their application in the field, do accelerometers provide an accurate measure of impact events that commonly occur in field team sports?”

**Methods.** Thirteen healthy adults (7 males and 6 females, age: 23.38 + 3.43 years, height: 172.6 + 10.6 cm, mass: 69.3 + 10.0 kg) were recruited for this study. Due to technical errors arising from equipment malfunction and subsequent data loss, the final sample was reduced to ten participants (age: 22.8 + 2.6 years, height: 174.8 + 9.2 cm, mass: 72.0 + 8.6 kg). Prior to data collection, each participant completed a familiarisation session to avoid any learning effects in relation to performance of the movement tasks. Following this, participants attended one 3.5 hour testing session, which was conducted in the Deakin University Motion Capture Laboratory. Participants were instrumented with one GPS-integrated triaxial accelerometer (SPI Pro, GPSports Pty Ltd, Australia) for all trials. Positional data for three reflective markers (one each to represent the movement of the monitor, pelvis, and left ankle) was recorded by the optical motion analysis laboratory cameras (Eagle-4, Motion Analysis, USA) for all trials, while a portable force plate (model ACG, Advanced Mechanical Technologies Inc., USA) was used during all jumping and landing tasks, to provide criterion measures for validation of two accelerometer variables (Y axis acceleration data, and vector magnitude calculated from triaxial data). The prescribed movement tasks were selected to replicate common field team sport movements. Each participant performed repeated trials of the movement tasks in the following order: drop landing (DLAND); countermovement jumping (CMJ); drop jumping (DJUMP); running (RUN); and cutting (CUT).

**Results.** _Force as the criterion measure:_ Peak SPI_Y and SPI_VM values were significantly greater than VGRF/BW across the tasks. Moderate correlations (r = 0.23 – 0.57, r2 = 0.05 – 0.32; p < 0.05) were observed between the accelerometer variables and force for all jumping and landing tasks, except the second landing phase of the DJUMP task. Correlations were stronger in relation to VM values (average r = 0.46, average r2 = 0.21; p < 0.05) compared to when Y axis values were used (average r = 0.38, average r2 = 0.15; p < 0.05). Most %CVdiff values examining the Y axis acceleration data were below the acceptable limit of 20%, though DJUMP (2L) was slightly above this limit (%CVdiff = 21.1%). All %CVdiff values in relation to vector magnitude were all outside the acceptable limit. _Motion laboratory marker accelerations (at 60 Hz) as the criterion measures:_ SPI_Y and SPI_VM peak acceleration values were significantly higher than all three markers, for all tasks. Mostly moderate to strong correlations (r = 0.29 – 0.82, r2 = 0.08 – 0.67; p < 0.05) were observed between the accelerometer variables and marker accelerations recorded during the jumping and landing tasks. However, correlations observed during the RUN and CUT tasks were sporadic. Aside from one extreme outlier, %CVdiff values calculated for both accelerometer variables were large and well above the acceptable limit. _Motion laboratory marker accelerations (at 120 Hz) as the criterion measures:_ SPI_Y and SPI_VM were significantly greater than peak acceleration values calculated for all three markers. However, correlations were rarely observed between peak accelerations measured during the DJUMP, RUN, and CUT tasks. Almost all %CVdiff values were considerably higher than the acceptable upper limit, for both accelerometer variables across all tasks. _Task and condition discrimination:_ Both accelerometer measures were generally able to distinguish between conditions within a given task, except for the CUT task. In addition, both accelerometer variables were able to discriminate between jumping-based tasks (DLAND, CMJ, DJUMP) and running-based tasks (RUN, CUT).

**Conclusions.** The results of the present study suggest that accelerometers placed at the base of the neck, as they are commonly used in the field, do not provide an accurate measure of impacts experienced in the lower limbs during the performance of common team sport-related movements. This finding is primarily attributable to the distance of the monitor from the impact site, the effects of impact attenuation, and vibration of the monitor within its harness. Based on the results of the present investigation, it was concluded that accelerometer data was able to discriminate between jumping-based and running-based tasks. However, neither of the two accelerometer variables examined were sufficiently accurate to be used as indirect measures of peak force experienced on ground contact, or peak accelerations experienced at the ankle, pelvis, or base of the neck. Further investigation is recommended into the feasibility of different accelerometer placement sites and attachment methods (e.g., Velcro closures, adjustable straps), to minimize monitor vibration while addressing accessibility, athlete comfort, and safety factors in the context of team sports use.
